Pouta network documentation (#1628)
CSCfi/csc-user-guide: docs/cloud/pouta/networking.md

# Networking in Pouta
Every cPouta project comes with a default network and router configuration enough for most purposes. Most often, you don't need to worry about the network or router configuration and you can create virtual machines using the defaults.

> In the situation that your project is missing a default network you will not be able to create a virtual machine. And if you are missing a router, you will not be able to assign ports in your machine for example to a floating IP.

Reviewer: It may be useful to rewrite this so the concept of "port" is explained.

If you find yourself in the need of creating a network and or router, you can recreate the default settings via the web interface with the following instructions.
## Create a network

Open [cPouta](https://pouta.csc.fi) and navigate to **Network > Networks**.  
Click on **Create Network** button on the upper right. A new window will open.

![Create network on Pouta](../../img/pouta-network-1.png)
**Network Name** - Specify a name for your network  
**Enable Admin State** - Enable the network  
**Create Subnet** - Leave check if you want to create a subnet  

> **Availabity Zone Hints** - Select your availability zone.  

Reviewer: There is currently only one availability zone in our OpenStack

Click on **Create Router** on the upper right. A new window will open.
![Create a router on Pouta](../../img/pouta-router-1.png)
**Router Name** - Specify a name for your router  
**Enable Admin State** - Enable the router  
**External Network** - Choose which external you want to use for the router  
**Availability Zone Hints** - Select your availability zone.

After filling in the necessary fields, you can click on **Create Router**  

Now that you have the **router** created, you need to attach it to your internal network to allow communication with the external. Click on your router newly created and go to the tab **Interfaces**.  
Click on **Add Interface**
![Add interface to router in Pouta](../../img/pouta-router-2.png)
**Subnet** - Select the network you want to attach.  
**IP Address** - This option is not mandatory, if you don't add an IP address, the gateway IP will be selected.

Now you attached your interface to the router and able to connect to the external network. You can see a graph by clicking on **Network > Network Topology** and select the tab **Graph**
![Network topology in Pouta](../../img/pouta-network-topo-1.png)

*NOTES:  

> If you want to access your instances from the external, you need to associate a [floating IP](launch-vm-from-web-gui.md#post-creation-step).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to access your instances from an external network, you need to associate a [floating IP](launch-vm-from-web-gui.md#post-creation-step).  
```
